our
idea of what our self is
is just another
idea
a human being starts to really get
empowered with themselves when they
start to
make sense to themselves
it's what i'm doing up here that's
making me have that reaction and if i'm
the problem i am also the solution
we actually can create ourselves we can
create our future by beginning to make
new choices now
the feeling brain so the thinking brain
thinks in terms of like logic cause and
effect correlations things like that the
feeling brain thinks in terms of
importance
it thinks in terms of values so
some things are very valuable
and worthy of our of being pursued and
other things are very
very
not valuable and they're they should be
avoided
and the feeling brain kind of designates
you know almost a value score for
everything every experience every
potential experience that we we can
consider
including ourselves so
our
idea of what our self is is just another
idea the same way
um you know
being
living in new york is an idea and i
there is a certain value i place on that
and that that idea has logical
connections to all sorts of things that
who i am as mark manson is simply a
constructed idea in my mind and as a
constructed idea my feeling brain has
either positive or negative
valuations and feelings for for mark
manson um
when people have a low valuation of
themselves when they have when their
feeling brain thinks that their identity
is not valuable and and
have negative emotions about it uh we
call that low self-esteem and when
our the idea of ourself
our feeling brain has a high valuation
of it and has positive feelings for it
we call that high self-esteem and so a
lot of like therapeutic work for many
decades
was kind of almost obsessed of like just
trying to get people people's this
relationship between your feeling brain
and your conception of your identity to
get it to get the needle to move from
negative to positive
because there are all sorts of you know
positive
repercussions of that
but ultimately
that your your concept of yourself is
built out of
um the narratives that we create out of
our experience so all of the experiences
that i've had or all the experiences
that you have you know your idea of tom
is just this
vast collection of
uh
narratives that you've constructed
around your own experiences and it's
layer on top of layer on top of layer on
top of layer and your feeling brain has
a certain
you know valence for those experiences
um
and so if you want to change how you
feel about yourself you have to start
peeling back those layers of narrative
and start getting down into the deepest
earliest ones because those are often
the most impactful and influential one
of the interesting aspects of what when
people talk about awareness these days
what i feel is if they're mostly talking
about is being aware of others
so they're talking about how others
speak and others listen and others
behave and real awareness is is actually
starting to get aware of oneself and and
i think if you ask most people they'll
say they are pretty aware
um but you know give me 10 minutes with
them and they'll see how blind and deaf
they've been you know like they just
can't they just they aren't connected to
their own wiring in many ways you know
do you have like a series of questions
that you ask people to
to help them
see that they aren't as aware as they
might think they are
yeah well you know
basically i get people used to tell me
about themselves right you'll you'll
hear
you'll hear the you'll hear and see the
blind spots everywhere they're all over
their conversations so when somebody
talks
they're in fact speaking from the world
that they're in
but
people don't
experience themselves as being in a
world
we experience ourselves as being in the
but you're not you're in a very
biased
a very kind of slanted a very kind of
weighted place in life you're you're not
interacting with life
you're interacting with you interacting
with life and that's a very it's a very
kind of nuanced thing
and when you started point to some of
those things with people you start to
see like well well how come this is
something that you get hooked by or how
come this is a strength of yours but
also a weakness of yours
and that's when people start to join the
dots up for themselves it's really not
about
telling people
it's really about asking the right kind
of questions and engaging in the right
kind of conversation with somebody
that you you'll watch them you'll see
people joining the dots up for
themselves like oh my gosh yeah that
that
and then
my in my view
a human being starts to really get
empowered with themselves when they
start to
make sense to themselves like your own
actions your own thoughts your own
emotional states when all that starts to
logically click for you
to me those are the beginnings of true
awareness
the roles that we played the dynamics
that we got here's that word again
familiar with right earliest in life
that we maybe started repeating once we
were toddler age and had peers right we
become the helper at home and now we're
the helper in our friend group or we're
the the yes person always saying yes or
the caretaker we tend to be really
repetitive in how we relate
and i'm of the belief that those
earliest patterns again are just
repeated in time so whether you do
reading on attachment styles and you
know that you're anxious or anxious
avoidant or you just observe your
dynamics and relationships the takeaway
is always
that which i did in childhood that which
was familiar how do i feel bonded to
people how do i feel safe with people or
not safe with people become those
patterns that i repeat over time
awareness is key here becoming aware
what are my relational patterns
how close do i feel to people are there
emotions i bring into my relationships
or do i keep this type of emotion out or
all type of emotions out again do i tend
to play one particular role is there
always a need or maybe all of my needs
that go unmet in my relationships or do
i feel comfortable expressing myself
when i have a need etc
and again i believe that we're very
patterned all that lives in our
subconscious so becoming aware and
conscious allows us to over time begin
to break some of those habits and
patterns that don't serve me beginning
to put up a boundary beginning to say no
beginning to express my need when i have
it
is there a window of hyper malleability
where the
you could sort of reprogram the infant
or is it
like
almost like an imprinting machine where
it's like nope you had this heavy amount
of stress in utero that's imprinted and
no matter what you do in the first three
years is never going to undo that
it is imprinted uh in many ways
biologically which we could talk about
that the person is not even aware of
imprinted in how the genes are turned on
and off and printed on how their
chromosomes function imprinted how their
stressor apparatus
responds to the external environment um
imprinted in their cells imprinted in
inflammation in their bodies and so on
and so on
and the earlier it happens and the more
it happens and the more temperamentally
sensitive the child the greater the
effects
having said that
it's never not reversible it's never not
approachable now
fact is people can heal
people can
rewire themselves people can
[Music]
find a
equilibrium but the more happened
earlier and the earlier it happened the
more difficult that work becomes which
brings me
to my
um epitaph that i've designed for my
gravestone you know what it's going to
say it's going to say it's going to say
it was a lot more work than i had
anticipated
you know
it is a fair assessment
it's ongoing work like i'm 77 it's
ongoing work
and you know um
when i don't take care of myself
emotionally when i don't do my yoga when
i don't get myself into the swimming
pool or on the exercise bike
um
when i
take on too much in my life
it gets activated so
yes
it can be dealt with it can be healed
and it can be
uh
regulated
but it takes consciousness it takes
awareness
self-worth equals the sum of our
emotions over time so
you could even you might even say like
identity equals our emotions over time
so
basically let's say
something traumatic happens in your
childhood
that
that pain early on in your life causes a
lot of negative emotions and one of the
things that i talk about is that anytime
we feel an emotion it compels us to
to do what i call equalizing which is um
like if i'm angry at you i'm going to
continue to be angry at you until
i either
get you know retaliate or you apologize
like something needs to happen to make
that anger go away there needs to be
some sort of like equalization between
us
and if there is no equalization that
anger just kind of simmers and sits
there um forever and one of the reasons
why
childhood traumas are so debilitating
for people is that essentially these
extremely painful experiences occur
to our feeling brains
while our thinking brains are still
undeveloped and don't know how to
explain or create meaning around that
pain
so let's say something really painful
happened to me now i'd be like oh well
you know
he meant well and
you know [__] happens or whatever but if
i'm like a five-year-old my explanation
for it only gets as far as like i'm a
bad i'm a bad boy i'm a bad person and
the world hates me you know like that's
and that will stick
um
because it doesn't get equalized and
i'll stick for the rest of my life and
the problem is is that we forget that
that painful thing happens so we just
kind of go through life
with this
uh feeling of inferiority and pain that
lingers that we can't really put an
explanation to or explain away
and so the process of therapy is
basically
unraveling a lot of our
experiences until we get back to that
original experience and with our adult
thinking brain we can now put meaning to
that pain that is helpful to us
essentially like how do you help people
out of something so gnarly that has a
real reason to be upset about
yeah it's incredibly difficult and the
end i think can imply here you know
honoring the upset honoring the part of
you that does feel like you got the
short end of the stick or that it is
unfair that is still wearing the
consequences of our past and making
space
for you know whatever it is that we want
to see happen differently or whatever it
is that we imagine would would shift or
change in our life if things were to be
different that and can go a long way and
i say that because i think for a very
long time forever in the beginning it's
very hard for those of us who've been
practicing
that
short end of the stick dialogue that
it's not fair um just like all things we
can't vanish that overnight
so for some of us it's just noticing
when it's there
and
unhooking the attention not expecting
your subconscious to just realize that
oh that's not helpful anymore okay tom
i'll just leave you alone then no
worries
absolutely not your subconscious is
going to probably offer you
it's not fair narrative in every
situation that you would otherwise have
thought it's not fair so don't
anticipate that it's going to go away
what we have control over though is
spending less time thinking it so the
first time you hear your your mental you
know rehearsal if it's not fair instead
of just doing whatever it is you
typically do going down the you know the
the circle of the drain of it's not fair
until all the things that aren't fair we
all have the thing we do with the first
thought once it becomes that first
thought spending less time so that
allows us to then expand to make space
for something new but i share that first
part
because i think some of us do magically
expect it to vanish we get upset when it
doesn't um and then when it doesn't we
then spend too much time so we can
empower ourselves by acknowledging that
it's there and then by removing our
attention and building our muscle and
refocusing it maybe here is where you
offer yourself the reframe that you
prefer to practice in that moment
which you're not going to believe let me
add end on that
do not expect to believe the new thought
in that moment don't expect to go from
it's not fair it's totally fair of
course you're not going to
do that 180
though you can begin to practice
something new what is up my friend tom
bilyeu here and i have a big question to
ask you how would you rate your level of
personal discipline on a scale of 1 to
10 if your answer is anything less than
a 10 i've got something cool for you and
let me tell you right now discipline by
its very nature means compelling
yourself to do difficult things that are
stressful boring which is what kills
most people or possibly scary or even
painful now here is the thing achieving
huge goals and stretching to reach your
potential requires you to do those
challenging stressful things and to
stick with them even when it gets boring
and it will get boring building your
levels of personal discipline is not
easy but let me tell you it pays off in
fact i will tell you you're never going
to achieve anything meaningful unless
you develop discipline right i've just
released a class from impact theory
university called how to build ironclad
discipline that teaches you the process
of building yourself up in this area so
that you can push yourself to do the
hard things that greatness is going to
require of you right click the link on
the screen register for this class right
now and let's get to work i will see you
inside this workshop from impact theory
university until then my friends be
legendary peace out
and i think it will help people to to
begin to connect those dots if they
understand sort of what some of those
dots are
um using just your own story as an
example i think would be super
enlightening well it was the first it
was the first time in my life that i
ever realized i had a perspective
right did you know you were struggling
with something at that point
um
i like everybody else you know it was
like well you know it's tough to start a
business and it's tough being married
and you know all the same things that
we're all kind of like making okay in
our lives you know and sometimes it goes
too far like our you know our
relationships break down our businesses
go down
but it seemed to me like i'm just
wrestling with the same stuff as
everybody else you know
and and i'm working my title off at that
time in my life in a very specific thing
that i thought would answer a lot of
these questions that were kind of
ruminating in my life right like i
really i really did believe that one day
this was all going to turn out
right which
was one of the illusions that i had to
really confront but it was never part of
your life would automatically become
what you wanted it to become is that
what you mean yeah yeah it'll be one day
when all of this work
i would wake up and the birds would be
singing right and that sun would be
shining and all was good in my world and
i realized that i'd never had that day
in my life like i i've been working
towards it i've been trying to make this
happen
but when you but you know that's
perspective is a word that gets thrown
around the law like what is your
perspective
it's such a thin word to deal with this
really
uh kind of
voluminous thing it's a your perspective
is is in everything you hear everything
you see everything you say everything
you experience every feeling every
emotion
you know
all of it that's your perspective and
it's hard to see it because you're in it
so you can't really witness it
so when i started to do work on myself
i'd and it was in a specific area
actually it was in my relationship with
my parents
which at the time in my life i would
have said was fine right it's okay you
know it's fun
but but i never realized that fine was
[__] you know
i thought flying was just fine
no one had ever said but why not amazing
and once i started to dig down and that
then i could see well because of this
and because of that because of this and
because of that
and it was the first time in my life
that i'd ever really confronted that
that was just a point of view
like my entire past
is only a perspective it's not
it's not the actuality of my past
it's the past
of the eyes and the ears of the person
who was in it but there was a lot of
people in that past with their own eyes
and ears with a whole different take
away from it than i had
but i lived like what i took away
was now what
is like the firm foundation under my
feet
so i questioned everything it was very
unsettling at the beginning they
actually questioned
what like the narrative
and i'd never questioned the narrative
like truly questioned it because i've
never seen it
because to me it was the truth
and that's the problem people spend
their adult life overcoming a truth that
they made up because every single moment
as you know sets you up for the next
moment and you string these moments
together and guess what you have your
life until we get to that incredible
death bed we never know when that's
coming so every single moment is an
opportunity for us to check ourselves
before we wreck ourselves and so i just
try and play the game if i'm miserable
if i'm upset if i'm angry if i'm cranky
it is my responsibility because it's
based on what i'm thinking or believing
in that moment it's not the outside
world causing me to feel this it's what
i'm doing up here that's making me have
that reaction and if i'm the problem i
am also the solution
so how do you in your own life begin to
unwind that so i i'm assuming you
literally walk yourself through that so
you realize okay i'm the problem i know
this yes um is it visualization is it
framing is it saying i'm going to take a
new perspective on this yeah
it literally is like lighten up girl
you're fine like do you have a roof over
your head right now yes then things are
damn good is there some food in the
fridge you're probably luckier than
millions of people on the planet right
now is there running water in the
kitchen and in the bathroom yes again
you're better off than probably a
billion people or more so that little
reframe helps me and then in the moment
again it sounds so simple but i think
we're all searching for these really
complex things and we don't need them if
you can catch yourself arguing with
reality in the moment and realize that's
not a wise thing to do you can then back
yourself up and go okay
that didn't turn out right so what am i
going to do about it am i going to be
miserable in this moment and let this
ruin my night or am i going to send off
the email to say hey when's that work
going to come and let's readjust our
communication plan so this doesn't
happen again but the argument and the
irritation is not necessary to get a new
result
to what extent do you see that we're
sort of creating our own reality and how
do we develop the wisdom to navigate
that well
yeah
so there's a there's a lot
there's a lot um
about that that that seems so uh unreal
to us when you think i create my own
reality okay
and because you know you reach out you
touch the table right it's not like
you're imagining some holograph or
something right
but but you are you are creating your
own experience of being alive and your
actions are coming very much coming from
your experiences
so when i talked about you're both the
matrix and you're the rebels
um
all of us all human beings are
constantly setting up the game
uh set up the game subconsciously
so you're setting up the game of
relationships you're setting up the game
of finances you're setting up the game
your body yourself
and so you're kind of following
predictable pathways
and and but you're also struggling with
some of these things
right like for instance i'll give you a
really simple example
if i'm somebody who struggled with money
and i know that saving money is really
good for me
why would i spend my last hundred bucks
at the mall and why would i do that
right
until you start to consider well maybe
what i'm doing is i'm setting up the
struggle
maybe that's the game for me
subconsciously
but if you take that same principle with
your body with your love life with your
career
see how you fundamentally relate to
yourself is very deep very profound
but you're so wrapped up in the surface
issues of your life
you can't really see what's driving at
all like how come it turned out this way
if you get so if you set aside the kind
of psychological explanations how come i
turned out this way and where in my head
and where is this going for me how does
this keep unfolding for me
and the surprising thing for a lot of
people is
whatever you're struggling with today
until you finally understand what's
driving
you'll continue to wrestle with that
until you die
you've got this thinking brain whose job
is to basically rewrite the map of a
past experience yeah
how do you help people take control of
that or do you have thoughts around how
they can take control of that are there
like i i would say i have a very strong
thesis about whatever you rewrite like
the guiding principle should not be a
guiding principle of objective truth
because i think people are atrocious
at figuring out what is actually
objectively true sure so if you could
that would be amazing but since you
can't focus entirely on what's
empowering so using your language what
moves the needle to something positive
yeah do you have a guiding principle
that you tell people to utilize when
thinking about that rewriting process
i think
so everybody's a little bit different
and this is how i see like therapy
meditation journaling like a lot of
these therapeutic practices like
i see them they're all different
versions of what you just said is like
peeling that layer back looking at it
being like huh maybe that's not true
what what if this idea was true instead
like trying on new
uh narratives and in stories that define
ourselves
so everybody you know everybody kind of
has their own
you know
practice that will resonate with them
more
but it's in terms of like how to
actually go about it i think the first
step is to
just decide that you don't actually know
who you are again it's the buddhist
thing it's like the self's an illusion
it's an arbitrary construct that you've
spun up
over the course of your life and so it's
just this thing it's just this idea it's
a subjective
uh it's a subjective idea and it can be
anything you want now you don't that
doesn't mean you necessarily like wanna
become delusional and
decide that you're spider-man and and
you're gonna be
president of the ukraine like it's you
want to
be you want to be tethered to reality
but also understand that you don't like
you said you never know for certain
who you actually are you don't actually
know what's true you don't know if
you're a good person or a bad person you
don't know
if you're a musician or an author i
could label my label myself anything so
i think when we we start to realize that
how
uh kind of lose that certainty about who
we are what we think we know about
ourselves that kind of like
it starts to loosen the glue of that
that ball that ball of yarn of stories
that we've told ourselves
and once that glue is loosened you can
more easily pull pull threads out
and start to see like oh well yeah
that's
that's definitely not
you know that's probably not the most
helpful narrative that i could create
for myself
so i guess i guess that would be the
second step you know first step
lose the certainty second step is to
actually like pull on some of these
threads and then um
and then question you know what if that
wasn't true
how did you give yourself permission to
to really let go and be that quirky
person even in the face of the potential
rejection yeah so uh it wasn't an easy
road and i didn't get there overnight
so i was raised catholic even though i'm
not particularly religious now i
consider myself more spiritual but i
went to seton hall university and i
actually used to work for the church so
when i was about 23 i was still in this
mode of whenever i'd hit a crisis i'd
ask god for some guidance and the way i
did it in those days when i was right in
my journal and so i remember writing in
my journal at those at that time and
just saying like why can't i figure this
out like i so believe in my coaching
business and i also had all of these
other ideas of things i wanted to do
like hip-hop dance fitness writing i was
so enthralled with marketing and
business
but traditional wisdom was all about
focusing in it was all about choosing
one thing dominating a niche and every
time i tried to follow that traditional
advice i felt like i was cutting off a
limb
and so
in that plea in my journal and writing
what's wrong with me what's wrong with
me why can't i fit in why can't i follow
all the traditional ideas of what it
means to be successful
i got to a point where i just said [__]
it i can't do this i can't i was failing
i was miserable and i said if i'm not
going to be able to fit into this
traditional notion of success why don't
i throw out the whole notion together
and just do what i really want to do at
that point i was about 25 and i said to
myself you know you've always wanted to
dance you've never taken a dance class
in your life the only experience that i
had was like moonwalking across my mom's
kitchen linoleum floor to thriller with
like my white socks on when i was like
seven years old
and i always loved dance but i'd never
had any experience or training and so at
that point i was living in a tiny studio
apartment in new york city and i said
you know i should just go take a dance
class like wow what a novel idea but tom
i have to tell you i tortured myself
about that idea for years like i thought
about it i fantasized about it but i
never gave myself permission to do it
because it didn't fit in to being a
successful life coach or being a
successful person on wall street or
being a successful person in the
magazines i had such narrow ideas of who
i could be
and so when i threw out everything and
just said i'm just going to do this my
own way
i took my very first dance class at
broadway dance center
i had the dorkiest outfit on i remember
standing outside class and you know the
class before was finishing up and my jaw
just hit the ground because everyone in
there was so talented they were so good
i was so
like intimidated and i felt this panic
come over me cut to me going into the
class
hiding in the back getting down on the
floor to start the warm-up and the music
came on about seven seconds in i started
sobbing uncontrollably i had no idea
what was wrong what was going on i was
so thankful that the music was so loud
and i had long hair that i could cover
my face
and once i finally kind of started
moving i realized my body was saying yes
this is who you are this is part of who
you're meant to be
and so
you ask the question like how did i get
there it was because i tried so hard
doing everything everyone else told me i
should do
and when that didn't work i just had to
go off and bust out on my own and it was
through that experimentation
and moving my body and tapping into the
wisdom of this vessel that everything
started to move
a lot of what we're
we're kind of hooked by
as an adult is from
whatever we took away from our childhood
right so in my second book i talked
about this like
what are the elements that you took away
what have you built your life upon of
all the things that you could have taken
what did you take
right
and so when you question that with
somebody and somebody says you know like
my mother was controlling
okay which is a descriptive term of
things you saw
okay
when i say my mother was controlling
that's not just a phrase i'm knowing a
world
that exists now between her and i
right and in this world that i'm in with
her it's not my perspective i'm actually
watching her do things that confirm
what i've come to believe
i mean i
completely ignored all the other stuff
but i want to focus on that [__] right
because this to me is the big deal
and so when i say to somebody but what
if your mom isn't controlling and they
say well she is and i say i know but
what if she's not but if you just let go
of the notion that she's controlling
well
i'm not gonna let go without why she's
ruined my life i say no you've ruined
your own life and then people start to
fight for the narrative
why because they've built the life upon
it and they've told other people about
it and they've got a consensus around
them and so they're filled to life with
these people that are like yeah your
mother's controlling and you're like
yeah that's right she is and then when i
go into my relationship as an adult this
person is not going to control me and
even if that person is controlling me or
not controlling me i'm going to point to
all the ways that i think they are
and then it's like i've married my
mother
no
you're indulging your perspective
and you never get to see anyone beyond
your own perspective
and that's very confronting for someone
because if you've spent 10 20 30 40
years there's a carnage there might be
divorces there might be bankruptcies
built on
the illusion of control
and and then it's like then you start to
see like i've
i haven't been interacting with life
i've been interacting with my my my view
of it my judgment of it my opinion of it
and that's sometimes really challenging
for some of their stomach
so how do we create ourselves
yeah and this this is interesting
because for me this really turned um a
belief that i had internalized um for
quite some time on its head and for a
very long time i think like a lot of us
i didn't believe that there was much
creation that was possible i thought
that you know whatever genetics we were
born with whatever circumstances we were
born into
pretty much that would unfold and that
would become our path in life
with many things outside of our control
this was you know evidenced in the field
for a very long time when we used to
believe in genetic determinism that idea
that whatever it was we were given that
we don't really change we don't grow we
don't evolve our genes are our destiny
and now we understand differently we
actually know that we operate
with our choices meaning what i have
genes right that load the gun and then
the things i'm doing each and every day
determine how i am in life i even
believe that things such as personality
these patterned ways of being this is
exactly what you and i have been talking
about we could call that our genetic
personality or we could really look at
that as a conditioned way of being so
when i began to realize
that wait a minute things aren't as set
in stone i began to entertain many new
conversations with myself of possibility
of change and i now believe that we
actually can create ourselves we can
create our future by beginning to make
new choices now
like focusing on that point of like
if so if you're not improving yourself
for the right reasons
you could be damaging yourself you know
the why behind everything everything you
try to improve or everything that you're
driven towards is is
more important than
actually you know how far you get so for
me it's it's i i see a very direct
connection between
self-improvement and ethics
um i think if you if you dig deep enough
into these questions of what growth
means or what improvement means you
inevitably run into
what is better period what is better or
worse period what makes a better life
what makes humanity better um
and so it's my goal has always been i i
never want to be that guy on stage who's
like
this is what you should do this is how
you do it here's my five step method
blah blah blah you know i i want to be
the guy
who who doesn't
i don't want to give answers i want to
give better questions i want to help
people sort through these questions in
themselves because ultimately
the
these questions around values are so
personal there's there's no way for me
to answer any individual without
inserting my values onto them and when
you do that you rob them of the ability
to choose what matters for themselves
choose their own meaning in their life
so for me it's just it's all about just
pointing people in the right direction
pointing out you know little hypocrisy
or little like kind of paradoxes and and
trying to steer them towards
finding their own answers